now we've all heard the saying that
every rose has its thorn and when it
comes to roses it seems like the biggest
thorn of all is propagating them but I
am convinced that we can solve this
mystery together once and for all
[Music]
so guys just a few months ago my wife
and I went to the local nursery and we
just decided we want to get some roses
around here and so we went and bought
them we've had them in the past but the
deer just love these guys so much but
we're gonna put them in an enclosed
space probably in our garden area and
we're not going to worry about deer
anymore but check these beauties out
look at this we are in love with this
yellow right now it's just gorgeous look
at that yellow rose and then we've got
this pink one over here isn't that just
a beauty look at all those petals when
we went to the nursery this one smells
wonderful it's starting to get to the
end right there but more coming through
and the Reds starting to come out when
we went to the nursery we wanted to get
varieties that were more old-fashioned
and obviously not anything new that was
copyrighted that we couldn't take
cuttings from but I just love
old-fashioned plant varieties because
they're tried-and-true they tend to
withstand the test of time and they tend
to perform really well so we've got a
base here we've got a red a yellow a
lavender a pink and we've even got a
white that hasn't bloomed yet but we're
gonna get these guys planned out in our
landscape now it's a little early right
now roses are taken as semi hardwood
cuttings and we want to wait for this
new succulent growth you see that
bending right there we want to wait for
that to harden off down more like what
we got here in fact we might be able to
take cuttings from this lower part of
the stem right here because it is a
little more woody and hardened off and
maybe we'll just give that a go so as I
said you want to take rose cuttings as
semi hardwood cuttings and rhododendrons
are semi hardwood taken sometime in late
August but roses you can take a lot
sooner than that obviously we're in June
right now and it's not necessarily that
the time the month that you're taking
them but the condition of the wood that
matters so I've had these roses out in
my hoop house here all winter long and
well not all winter long we Bob a few
months ago but through the last part of
winter through the spring and the growth
has been coming on faster because we're
in this
warmer environment out here so this is a
little bit earlier than you would
normally take the rose cuttings if
they're out on your property now it's
the beginning of June I think it's June
6th today so but I've got plenty of
growth on those guys now a good rule of
thumb for you guys is you don't want to
take the rose cuttings when the new buds
the flower buds are still just starting
to open you want to take those cuttings
when the flowers are fully open and the
petals start falling off and that new
growth is starting to harden off you
don't want the soft supple growth that
can kind of bend over real easy you'll
want the growth further down the stem
that is gonna be a little bit more firm
and gonna be able to hold up to being
caught off of the parent plant alright
so before we go any further let's talk
about what we're gonna propagate this
guy in or these guys or however many
cuttings we end up taking so I've got a
standard 1 gallon pot here and I've got
it filled with fine fir bark you guys
have seen that before and that's what
we're gonna stick the cuttings into but
this is how I always propagated roses in
the past before the deer got ahold of
them and once again if you guys know me
you know that I like containers so these
two liter soda bottles work absolutely
fantastic for just about anything you
want to try and propagate especially
softwood cuttings and some semi hardwood
cuttings through the fall because it's a
beautiful built-in system guys you got a
vent cap on top I don't know if you guys
have ever tried this before but I
absolutely love these soda bottles so
I'm gonna cut the wrapper off of this
I've got my other tool here let's see
pair of scissors we're just gonna cut
the wrapper right off of this I've been
saving this for a while now the one is
much light getting down to that cutting
as possible alright so we got the label
off the ball now we've got a nice clear
plastic container with a little vent on
top for the roses the next thing I'm
going to do is just pop a hole right
through the bottom here and then I'm
gonna kind of work the scissors up and
cut around the very bottom of this all
the way around so that I can slide this
down over top of
shutting alright so there it is guys all
done I cut the bottom off we've got our
little vent cap there slick little setup
huh and the thing that we're gonna do
with this though I want to show you you
know this is gonna fit right over top of
the rose cutting it's going to be coming
up through here and you got plenty
humidity around this area
so the one thing I want to say though is
and you'll want to watch it and make
sure it doesn't dry out but if you take
that cap off and don't add it into the
equation it makes a perfect setup I've
routed plenty of things with in this way
with the cap off without ever having it
on sometimes people like to like when
they have a propagation dome they sealed
the lid up the little caps all the way
in the beginning the little vent holes
and then they slowly open them but with
this method you really don't need to do
that it's it's okay to have a little
vent hole in here one because you don't
have too much airspace down in here to
be able to draw air and flow it out too
fast so humidity can build up in this
hole too is small so you're not losing a
ton of humidity and moisture and if your
soil is moist enough then it's able to
build up plenty of humidity inside of
this container without losing too much
through the top the added benefit of
this just leaving the lid off here is as
it does slowly vent it's gonna vent heat
it's gonna rent the warmth in the thing
with these cuttings is you want the top
school in the bottoms warm so if you try
to put the cap on it would hold more
warmth in there you want to let that
moist or not the moisture but the heat
vent out of that area and the moisture
to build up inside and you're gonna do
that by leaving the vent off and keeping
the soil moist you're gonna have plenty
of moisture in there and the heats gonna
be able to vent it's just a beautiful
setup guys now I'm going to start with
this lavender rose here and I think I'm
just gonna take cuttings off of it right
now because mainly the wood on the
others just
isn't hardened off enough yet like I
said I think I'm pushing it a little bit
early with this but I think it's gonna
turn out okay
that the blooms here are starting to
kind of get towards the end a little bit
some of them are coming up fresh but
I've got some firmer material down on
the stem a little bit more and that's
what we're gonna take the other reason
I'm going after this guy is because it
is absolutely fragrant I mean it just
smells awesome and it's turning out to
be one of my favorites so let's zoom in
on this guy and show you guys what we've
got going on here so I've got this older
rose the bloomed here and the petals are
getting near the end and it's a nice
tall strong stem I don't want to go
after this because it's just it's kind
of thin and it bends a little more it's
still pretty soft wood it might be okay
but this is a strong stalk that is gonna
do really well I think so I'm gonna take
this Center one right here and we're
gonna get it where I'm gonna snip that
off and then we might be able to get
multiple cuttings out of it we'll take a
look and see so I'll slip this off and
we'll come back and show you alright so
there's our rose cutting and it's a nice
long one right there it's probably about
two foot little over two foot long and
like I said we need about I don't know
eight inches on average for a cutting of
these guys and then you want some leaves
at the top so I may be able to get a
couple cuttings out of these you want to
make sure you cut below a node which
this is a node right here little leaf
node you want to cut below it there's a
higher concentration of undifferentiated
cells in that node that will then be
able to become roots and then you also
want some top branches to be able to
have buds that can grow new branches and
a few leaves to help make some food for
the cutting then you still need enough
space to cut another note below another
note here and still have some leaves up
here so we'll work it out we'll get some
cuttings done here and then everybody
always ask me what do you do with the
flowers on top well you take them inside
for your wife all right so I got my two
cuttings here and man as you can see
they got thorns all over them so I might
have to be a little bit delicate here
with this but the thing that I do I
general
they don't strip bark off of roses
because you're gonna strip all these
little all these little thorns off of
them and then those create wounds for
the roots to grow through so that's how
I've dealt with it in the past let's go
ahead and prepare this big one here and
show you how that's gonna work the other
thing you want to keep in mind is we
want to make sure it fits inside of this
so we want to make sure that once we
prepare it and we stick it in the soil
it's all gonna fit I think we're gonna
be okay
so as usual we start and we just take
off the leaves I'm just ripping those
guys off and remember you're also
creating wounds there that are gonna
help the rooting process all right I'm
gonna leave my set of leaves on top here
in fact actually maybe what I'll do I'll
take one more layer I still got some
leaves on top and then I want to cut
those down because I don't need that
many leaves I'm gonna cut down to
probably just a few on each side here
let's see we'll go down to there
nobody's got a few little leaves up on
top there and then we'll go through
we're just gonna take all these little
thorns off of here they're kind of a
pain to deal with but hey like I said
every rose has its thorn and if you like
roses that's a part of dealing with it
so I just want to show you real quick
and I'll take the rest off there's the
wounds that those little thorns are
creating once we strip them off so you
can see there's gonna be lots of wounds
all the way up and down this little stem
so I'll take the rest of these guys off
and show you what we got all right guys
so there's my two little cuttings and I
already went ahead and dipped them in
the rooting hormone and you can see
right here all of those little stems are
all those little thorns that were on
they're all kind of accepted some
rooting hormone and it's gonna work out
real well we're probably gonna get lots
of roots in those areas but we just got
a couple little leaves on top of each of
I'm one's a little longer than the other
fact one was just further up the stem so
we'll see what we get I don't know I'm
excited usually this method works
really well for roses I'm gonna stick
them in this pot now let's get the
little lid on there and see what happens
a couple little tips for you to guys
with these is these rose cuttings
generally I like to do them with a
powder rooting hormone the reason is
roses are for some reason seem to be a
little more susceptible to fungal
diseases and the powder rooting hormone
helps prevent that helps keep things dry
from the beginning and just prevent that
I don't know if that's true or not it's
just my my theory it's my feeling it
just it works for me so that's what
we're gonna do and then the other thing
is with these this powder hormone I like
to put the water in the paisios dripping
out I just completely saturated that pot
with water right now and I'm letting it
just absorb tons of water now the excess
will just drain right now cuz that's my
fine fir bark that I use and it drains
really well but the medium is already
wet and then I can stick my cutting in
and not water all that rooting hormone
off right afterwards so I'll stick these
two cuttings in we're gonna put them in
the same little pot together with the
same little lid and we're gonna see what
happens guys alright so I got my little
pot here it's all been watered well I
got my cuttings taken rooting hormone on
and we are gonna go somewhere kind of
near the center and just put that right
down in a lot of times people like to
actually you know what I'm gonna put it
kind of in an angle yeah some of the
rooting hormone is getting pushed off of
it but the most of its gonna stay on
that cutting there we go you just want
to tamp down around it a little bit make
sure it's firmly in place and we'll get
this cutting and we'll shove it right
down in there I'm gonna try and make
sure the leaves aren't completely
together now you see I kind of put them
in an angle this one's angled out and
that one's angled out that way
so as the roots grow if both of them
take they don't you know I got a little
space to work with they're going to
tangle but and probably what I'll do is
leave them in this pot until the winter
when they go dormant and then it's
really easy to pull things apart and
pull roots out of here so anyway we'll
see what happens well you know I'm
planning on a wait for that because you
guys are gonna see the roots on these
guys we might have to tear these up
we'll see anyway I got all that on there
I'm gonna put my little lid right over
top here and just set it right down in
that soil doesn't have to be perfect
doesn't have to be buried in it or
anything because I don't mind a little
airflow and we'll see how long it takes
for some humidity to build up inside
there now normally I wouldn't do this
but because I've got this little vent
cap that's taken off of it I am just
gonna leave these little guys right
inside the hoop house the reason I
normally wouldn't do that is because too
much light comes through this plastic
and overheats things totes that are
sealed but this isn't sealed it's got
the little vent cap we can let heat flow
right out the top of it and it's got
plenty of moisture down in there to
evaporate and create humidity now I'll
watch it I mean you know nothing in
nature is perfect here so I'm gonna
watch it if I don't see humidity
building up enough I may take a little
spray bottle and just spritz down inside
of there to get some humidity in there
and then I'll watch it again and I'll
see if that all evaporates if it
evaporates too fast then I may just
stick the cap and just set it on top so
that I can see how you know I'll kind of
play with it and see what it takes to
get the humidity level built up in there
but even if you don't see anything
building up inside this container it's
still a more humid environment down
inside of there I've snipped plenty of
leaves off of those cuttings there were
robust cuttings and I think they're
gonna be strong enough and they've got
enough energy and food stored up in them
I think these guys are gonna do just
great and in fact as we're talking I
don't know if the cameras picking this
up but I can already start seeing some
humidity building up underneath these
leaves here so I'll come back we'll see
what it looks like here before too long
alright guys so it's been only about
seven eight minutes I came back out here
and we've already got humidity built up
hopefully that cameras picking it up but
a lot of humidity under those leaves
there and there's humidity all the way
up near the top here as well and that's
with that cap off and that's all we need
just enough humidity to keep those
leaves from losing too much moisture
it's just gonna create a beautiful
little environment with a little bit of
airflow and get that heat off of there
and I'm telling you guys this is just
the
fix it up this is how I did it in the
past and this is how I'm gonna do it
again and by god I am gonna grow roses
again so I don't know how long this is
gonna take now usually roses are like
four to eight weeks it just depends on
the condition of the wood I would lean
more towards the eighth week part of
that but I'm taking them a little bit
earlier and so we'll see what happens
maybe they'll root even sooner but we'll
come back here when the time is right
and something has happened
all right guys real quick it's about
four days after I took these cuttings of
the roses and I want to show you look at
how much humidity is built up in these
in this little 2-liter bottle here I
haven't touched it I haven't done
anything with it I watered it it's just
been building up humidity and I'll tell
you that all this humidity was in here
the very next morning I just didn't have
my camera on me and I didn't get a shot
of it but this much humidity has been
built up in this little system ever
since that actually it was that evening
but I there's no problems with that at
all and here we are like I said about
four days later and all those leaves are
still healthy viable doing well and
that's with the top off here it's just
letting heat out but the humidity is
built up just fine in that little
2-liter bottle guys guys guys you got to
check this out I came out here checking
on things and I saw something really
cool so there are rose cuttings and
they've been sitting back in there since
the 6th of June I've done nothing with
them they've just been sitting there I
keep it watered occasionally not a whole
lot but occasionally keep the soil moist
and today is July 10th here let's just
let's take this puppy up here and we are
gonna put it up on our bench and show
you something I'm not ready to take this
out yet but if we come down here let's
turn this pot you're gonna like what you
see look at that look at that isn't that
what we do this for guys isn't that what
it's all about look at that beautiful
little rose root coming through there
beautiful little guy look at that
anything else going on whoo look at that
beautiful beautiful little rosary you
see that right in there
there it is so far we're doing good guys
we got roots coming through they're
coming through the bottom so we know
we've got four inches maybe of roots
coming off of these guys I don't know
which one of them's rooted they're all
viable it's only been a little over a
month I'm gonna leave these guys in here
a little longer now I know what you're
worried about your thing and he's gonna
rip these things out of here spray water
on tear them all the heck and they're
gonna die I'm not gonna do that yet but
we are probably gonna do that at some
point but right now I just want to enjoy
it while it's still doing okay we've got
the top off this has been the lifesaver
I want you guys to know something I have
started other cuttings since I started
this guy in this hoop house here and
those cuttings were put in a sealed
container that didn't have a little top
on it and they wilted they wilted within
probably I think it was a couple hours
because even though this is 50% shade
you hear that rooster camellia even
though this is 50% shade there's still a
lot of heat buildup in the Sun I can see
the Sun through this although it's just
an orange dot it still is too much and
it beats down through this plastic and
it heats up inside of here and that's
why I tell you guys put this kind of
stuff on the north side of a building
where it gets no direct Sun but lots of
overhead blue sky you want light but you
don't want direct Sun because it will
cook them but because we had this top
off of this thing all the heat could
escape we've got plenty of humidity
built up and there look at that plenty
of humidity built up inside of this
thing but all of the heat has been able
to just flow out of here without any
problems at all and those cuttings look
healthy let's take this off and just
show you look at these guys beautiful
beautiful they're maintaining their
green there are a few little spider webs
on there they're maintaining their green
there I mean they're not yellowing at
all they're not showing any signs of any
problems going on with these guys
they're just absolutely gorgeous they're
gonna do really well they're gonna root
really well they're already proving
I mean look at this they're already
proving to us that they're getting some
roots through here and they're just
starting to grow on really good so now
the next question is when do we take
this thing off well because we put three
of them in one gallon container together
three did we we did two of them we did
two of them in one gallon container I
don't know which one it is that rooted
so I'm a little hesitant to take it off
quick so I like to do roses for maybe
six weeks before I really start feeling
comfortable with the routing and that
was about the time I was thinking about
pulling these guys out of here spraying
them off and showing you the roots and I
may still do that so just chill out
we'll get there but I think I want to
leave this on a little bit longer and
then at that point what I'll probably do
just so your work just so you know
what's going on is all put and maybe
we'll even do that now we'll see and
you'll have to watch it but maybe I
could put something just underneath this
little guy to hold it up off the bark so
that a little bit of airflow can get
down under here and flow out the top and
we'll just do a little at first and then
we'll just prop it up a little higher
all the time and eventually this thing
will be growing on its own roots without
it won't need the humidity anymore it'll
be completely acclimated but that's how
we're gonna acclimate this guy it's
already pretty well acclimated because
it's got air flow coming out through
here anyway and then it's just a matter
of fertilizing and letting the new
growth come on but I'm gonna keep this
video rolling I'm gonna show that to you
guys in this one video as we go so
you're not gonna get this quite yet but
the X actually you are gonna because by
the time you see this then all right
anyway so I'm not gonna get this quite
yet I got it I'm see once again I'm the
one that has to wait for this but that's
how the roses are doing we'll come back
when a little bit more is happening
alright guys so here's our rose cuttings
now let's recap for a second so we
started these cuttings on June 6th today
is July 20th the last clip that you saw
these guys was July 10th about a month
after we started them now today like I
said July 20th and maybe a week ago I
propped this up like I said I was gonna
I found these little metal pieces here
that I clipped off of a hog panel and I
just propped it up so some air flow
could
under here and up through here and out
our little chimney out the top and that
would let all the heat escape but I
propped it up so that we could start
acclimating these guys to the ambient
air and we didn't have so much humidity
in there you can still see that backside
I hope you can see that there's still a
little bit humidity there's not a lot
but it's just slightly more humid on the
inside there than it is on the outside
but these guys are acclimated now so I'm
gonna pull the top off we've got our
beautiful rose cuttings and we are gonna
do what you guys don't want me to do but
we're gonna do it anyway because this is
for educational purposes we're gonna
pull the rose cuttings out of the pot
guys and I'm just gonna tip these out
and if each of you can grab an end of
the stem now we don't want to pull grab
grab the end of the stem there Emily you
grab the end of the other stem you're
okay just don't grab the thorn you're
okay
and slowly kind of don't pull I'm just
gonna kind of there we go we're getting
it we're getting hold onto him hold on
your hands look at that we got roots
guys we got roots alright girls so let's
show them how we're gonna get all these
roots out you guys see them look at that
the roots are growing all down the
bottom now don't get panicky guys don't
we're gonna be nice and gentle with
these we're just gonna kind of gently
tease these apart look at that isn't
that just fascinating isn't that just
the most fascinating thing you ever saw
roses they're such a problem for people
and here we are rooting them like crazy
and you guys can do the exact same thing
if you just follow these little tips and
tricks guys alright I'm going to set
this one down and we are gonna look at
this look at that guys look at that I
know kids think I'm crazy too look at
that look at all those roots guys and
that fantastic isn't it absolutely nuts
you seems just route like crazy a little
more route initial starting to pop
through there and everyone to start
rooting more look at that beautiful
beautiful little Rose cutting guys
beautiful let's do the other one look at
that guys look at that
and that just fantastic look at all
those roots trying to get that in there
for you cuz I know that that is the
money shot guys that's what you want to
see that is a stocky sturdy cutting that
is gonna do just fine I'm gonna pop this
guy up as well as the other one and
we're gonna see what it can do it's
gonna grow just fine guys I'm really
excited about this alright guys so we
got each of our roses here and we're
gonna pop these up real quick now the
roots are still moist everything's
looking good we've got some moist I fir
bark here I'm just gonna get these going
once again I only got the one hand girls
don't want to touch the bark and I don't
blame them so I'm gonna take a hit for
the team here a couple more weeks from
now these roots are just gonna recover
and fully take off and these things are
going to be filling up these pots again
we're gonna have some beautiful new rose
bushes look at that see I can do things
with one hand sort of and then we're
gonna run it over the pots just run it
across the pots you don't want to knock
all the bark out of there yep there you
go good job go over a few times other
one okay we're gonna turn this off go
ahead and turn the water off and then we
got to do one more thing here we need a
little bit of fertilizer going into
these guys you won't come up close ally
see what I'm doing so we've got that
slow release fertilizer here and I
always put a little bit of that in it's
a four month slow release and I'm not
going to use all of that in that little
cup because that's a lot for a newly
rooted cutting and we're just gonna
sprinkle some of that around the cutting
there and that's all they need so now
Emily we're gonna turn the hose back on
over here there you go
or it's gonna cut it go over them real
quick and water in water in that
fertilizer there we go and it won't
fully release yet it'll take
time for it to do that and then we're
gonna go set these guys back over by the
other plants and that's it guys that's
all there is to our little rooted
cuttings alright guys so that is all
there is to it I hope you guys learned
something from this but there's our rose
cuttings and they're all watered in well
I know a lot of you guys are worried
about oh man he pulled him out he's
gonna kill those cuttings they're not
gonna die those guys are a hardy and
they're strong and there's more route
initials growing up and down those
little stocks and them suckers are just
gonna burst out with tons more roots in
the pots aren't they girls you believe
me yeah you sure you believe me yeah
about you yeah you better believe me
alright guys so thank you for watching
this video
I hope you take this information you
guys go out and you propagate your own
roses with a 2-liter soda bottle it's
gonna work I'm telling you here it is
for all you doubters out there it works
roses are easy to propagate you're just
using the right technique so I hope you
guys enjoy this video if you did hit the
like button subscribe if you want to
follow along we will do some updates on
these roses you want to do it have an
awesome week and I'll see you in the
next video adios takeover
[Music]